*Treatment
Changing sleep habits and taking care of any issues related to insomnia, such as stress, medical conditions or medicines, can result in restful sleep for many people. If these steps do not work, your doctor may recommend cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), medicines or both to improve relaxation and sleep.

*CBT for insomnia
Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia can help you control or stop negative thoughts and actions that keep you awake. It's usually recommended as the first treatment for people with insomnia. Typically, CBT is as effective or more effective than sleep medicines.

The cognitive part of CBT teaches you to learn and change beliefs that affect your sleep. It can help you control or stop negative thoughts and worries that keep you awake. It also may involve ending the cycle of worrying so much about getting to sleep that you cannot fall asleep.

The behavioral part of CBT helps you learn good sleep habits and stop behaviors that keep you from sleeping well.

*Strategies include:

*Stimulus control therapy. This method helps train your mind and body to sleep better and not fight sleep. For example, you might be coached to set a regular time to go to bed and wake up, not nap, and use the bed only for sleep and sex. You also may be coached to leave the bedroom if you cannot go to sleep within 20 minutes, only returning when you're sleepy.

Relaxation methods. Progressive muscle relaxation, biofeedback and breathing exercises are ways to lower anxiety at bedtime. Practicing these methods can help you control your breathing, heart rate and muscle tension so that you can relax.

Sleep restriction. With this method, you reduce the time you spend in bed and stop napping during the day, so you get less sleep. This makes you more tired the next night. Once your sleep improves, you gradually increase your time in bed.

Remaining passively awake. Also called paradoxical intention, this strategy for learned insomnia aims to reduce your worry and anxiety about being able to get to sleep. You get in bed and try to stay awake rather than expect to fall asleep. This approach reduces your extreme focus on sleep and anxiety over not sleeping, making it easier to fall asleep.

Light therapy. If you fall asleep too early and then wake up too early, you can use light to push back your internal clock. You can go outside when it's light outside in the evenings or you can use a light box. Talk to your doctor for advice.

Your doctor may recommend other strategies related to your lifestyle and sleep area to help you create habits that lead to sound sleep and daytime alertness.

*Prescription medicines
Prescription sleeping pills can help you get to sleep, stay asleep or both. Doctors generally do not recommend relying on prescription sleeping pills for more than a few weeks. And medicines should not be the only treatment. But several medicines are approved for long-term use.

It's not known how long medicines can be wisely used. Rather, medicines are prescribed on a case-by-case basis, with you and your doctor weighing the benefits and risks. In general, it's best to use the lowest effective dose and not use medicines for too long.

*Options for treating those who are having trouble falling asleep are:

Eszopiclone (Lunesta).
Ramelteon (Rozerem).
Temazepam (Restoril).
Triazolam (Halcion).
Zaleplon (Sonata).
Zolpidem tartrate (Ambien, Ambien CR, Edluar).
Options for treating those who are having trouble staying asleep, waking too early or finding it hard to get back to sleep are:

Doxepin hydrochloride (Silenor).
Eszopiclone (Lunesta).
Suvorexant (Belsomra).
Temazepam (Restoril).
Zolpidem tartrate (Ambien, Ambien CR, Edluar).
Prescription sleeping pills can have side effects, such as causing daytime grogginess and creating a higher risk of falling. They also can be habit-forming. If your doctor prescribes a medicine to help you sleep, ask for more information, including possible side effects and how long you can take it.

Sleep aids available without a prescription

Sleep medicines available without a prescription contain antihistamines that can make you sleepy. These medicines are not for regular use. Talk to your doctor before you take these medicines, as antihistamines may cause side effects. Side effects may include daytime sleepiness, dizziness, confusion, problems with thinking and difficulty urinating. Side effects may be worse in older adults.